thank you and welcome to session 139
leveraging BSD Services in Mac OS 10
hope you all had a good lunch we will
try and keep you awake this afternoon
and as most of you know my wrapped
around Darwin kernel Mac OS 10 it's our
own customized version of BSD and with
that what that means for us developers
you now have a whole library of BSD
tools and applications available to you
and you can also explore the power of
our BSD to bring your BSD applications
to our platform so without further ado
I'd like to introduce the director of
core OS engineering Brant Hallie
[Applause]
good afternoon
I'm impressed here it is Friday
afternoon after lunch right before a
three-day weekend and you're in here so
you must be the real hardcore guys so
we're gonna spend some time this
afternoon and talk a little bit about
what BSD is in Mac OS 10 what kind of
role it plays within the system how you
can actually get involved in programming
with it on 10 and a bit about the BSD
community because it's more than just
the technology by now if you've been to
a number of our sessions you've seen the
architectural diagram for your where
Darwin and core OS fit into the
architecture of Mac OS 10 there's a lot
of Technology down on in in the kernel
and and we're going to focus today on
just the BSD portion of this a little
later today there'll be some discussion
on the bsd kernel pieces and the mach
kernel right after this session first we
want to talk a little bit about bsd from
the kernel perspective understand that
you know as far as darwin kernel
architecture is concerned that bsd if
you will suckin on that if you layer the
even at the kernel level bsd sits on top
of our kernel architecture it has the
filesystem technology the networking
layer and basically provides the POSIX
if you will functionality layer for the
system IO kit within the kernel space is
our
answer for dealing with io and drivers
and and basically abstractions for
devices on the system and underneath
that sits mock which is fundamentally
responsible for abstracting the
processor dealing with low-level tasks
and thread abstractions memory
management and again dealing with the
processor and our processors in the case
of an MP system for BSD need to realize
that you know as being just a sub
component of Mac OS 10 that really BSD
is an operating system in and of itself
it's it is a kernel environment that
sits within our within our kernel kernel
space of the system it's also a set of
user land libraries and services that
are available to the applications and
it's also an application environment in
and of itself the command line if you
will from the kernel perspective it's
worth noting that we there's some
history to how BSD actually came to play
in Mac OS 10 and we'll talk a bit more
about that later but for what we ship
it's based on the BSD 4 4 4 4
environment as well as being integrated
with mock and I ok it provides the
personality api's for the system mock as
it sits on the bottom is very much of an
abstraction Lee are dealing with
processor management memory management
it doesn't actually provide any if you
will policy to the system bsd kernel
however does it very much represents the
OS policy of the system it is
responsible for the process model that
defines how each and every application
space runs it also provides the basic
security policy for the system whether
it be the concept of individual users or
even as is abstracted down to the file
system to access the files and other
services of the OS from a process model
perspective a you know there's kind of
two ways of looking at this within Mac
OS 10 again at the very lowest level
Mach is responsible for the abstraction
of the processor and the memory
management and it has an abstraction or
model called a task which is responsible
for providing that container to ten
to a memory basically for an address
spacer
a chunk of memory that represents an
application the bsd process sits on top
of those very low level primitives and
provides a considerable amount of
additional state to the system it's
responsible for much of the OS resource
management so for things like file
descriptors and you know network
services and things like that and high
level memory abstractions as well as of
course all the network resources the bsd
process is responsible for that and when
a bsd process you know terminates for
some reason either because the
application quits or because there's
some type of fault condition it's the
responsibility of BSD to actually
reclaim all the resources that are
associated with it with a given
application in addition there's other
ancillary services that the process
provides things like environment
environment variables and signal
delivery ways of being able to provide
some type of a low-level interrupt
dispatch if you will at the application
level BSD also provides the rest of the
security policy and that is certainly
the concept of users where inherent to
the system at the very lowest level is
this concept of multiple users on the
system you know as you normally as you
set up Mac OS 10 you set up your you
know yourself is the default user much
of that is kind of hidden away as the
system will automatically log in but
it's possible to set up Mac doors tend
to support multiple users on the system
each with their own set of privileges
and capabilities and its
responsibilities of BSB BSD to enforce
that there's also this concept in BSD of
a super user and this is you know
affectionately known as root and root
has certain particular capabilities and
in the system to be able to do things
that administrator or access certain
resources that are beyond other the
capability of other users in the system
for Mac OS 10
we've worked from a user experience
perspective to try and abstract away the
concept of root it's still there if
you're a smart you know familiar with
and
of how UNIX works and BSD works it's
possible to actually to enable root in
Mac OS 10 and use it just like you would
in any other BSD system but it's
something we try to abstract away for
your conventional user because we don't
want them to have to become UNIX system
administrators but it's important to
note that there is a certain set of
capabilities and facilities that the
super user or root user of the system is
able to do and that when you do things
like installations or other things and
you go through the process of
authentication you're effectively
enabling that level of access to the
system other aspect of security pasal
policy involves the file system again
the concept of users in the system is
actually reflected down into the file
system each and every file system file
on the system has an owner a group that
it's it's part of and permission access
to to those files that they're
associated with it and those but those
same types of capabilities can be
applied to other kinds of capabilities
in the system bsd is also kind of the
environment with which the fart within
which the file system sits it's based on
a VFS architecture the standard bsd file
system architecture and which just
supports a number of different file
system plug-in types and things like
that an earlier in the in the week
there's a session on file systems that
went into this and more depth but it's
important to note that the file system
environment is a subset if you will or
whether a subsystem of the BSD
environment the same is true for
networking the capabilities of
networking and Mac os10 are built on the
BSD sockets api's and if you're you know
interested in learning more about either
of these particular subsystems that bsd
at the kernel environment there's some
really great books out there by mcusic
and a couple others that actually go
into some of this architecture Stevens
is a good one for networking and there's
again both of these can are based off a
standard BSD architecture before I get
on to the user environment I do want to
make sure people are reminded that
immediately following this session there
is a session on the darwin kernel itself
to get more into the low levels of the
system
well they'll talk a lot more about Mach
and the bsd kernel and that's here in
this room moving on to the bsd user
environment and that's really what's
kind of you know important from the
standpoint of most people who are going
to be writing code against bsd the user
environment is could be considered to be
app in other peer of cocoa and carbon
and classic if you will it's another
application environment available to the
system and it has a number of services
and facilities that are part of it
certainly it includes the command line
and shell and you know those kinds of
things that are what do you would expect
to be as part of a standard you know
unix and environment but it is also
where most of the you know network
client tools things like ssh things like
various sets of file tools and other
command-line tools that you would expect
is part of unix all those things exist
within the bsd user environment in
addition a lot of our high-level network
services are actually services that
exist within bsd they're actually bsd
applications if you will things like net
info dns services bar bind the network
time protocol demons and the system log
and the apache server which is used for
personal file sharing and on our server
product apache is also used for the
other high end web serving all of those
facilities are actually bsd you know
demons or commands and utilities that
exist on the system and run within the
bsd environment there's a number of
different kinds of applications that you
would expect to run here that are part
of either the system or the developer
tools things like Emacs and perl and
samba those kinds of things all of those
are the kind of applications you would
expect in this kind of environment the
way we abstract the api's and Mac OS 10
for BSD is through something we call the
system framework you probably as you've
been to a number of the various sessions
in Mac OS 10 we try and abstract api's
through the concept of frameworks and
the system framework is the one that
represents the API set that obstructs
BSD and the other aspects of the kernel
they include things like the POSIX style
of api's
again things like pthreads and other
things like that all exist there your
standard math library see libraries all
of that those are the kinds of things
that are part of the system framework
it's worth talking a bit about how POSIX
actually fits into the the plan here for
for Apple from our perspective it's
important to try and make sure that the
API is you know are are compliant so as
as people are working with the system we
find places where we need new api's or
things like that we actually will use
POSIX API s as a reference point that's
usually the basis as Steve said at the
keynote on Monday the focus around
staying within standards is a good thing
however even though compliance is a goal
for our perspective certification is not
something that we're trying to do so you
know as you're looking for things
there's going to be probably a lot of
little details where we may not
necessarily be you know completely you
know completely POSIX because that isn't
a goal for Apple but again where there
are API is when we introduce things like
pthreads
like there's also the POSIX shared
memory facilities those are as we've
introduced those into the system's will
tend to reference you know the POSIX API
as our starting point it's a worth
noting that the BSD API said is is is in
fact a first-class citizen in Mac OS 10
it's a just like carbon and cocoa it is
another application environment it can a
coexist in fact however with carbon and
cocoa and in fact Java because the way
that it sits is that all of the
application environment selves are
actually built on these api's even
though it's a peer of carbon and cocoa
if you will and the ability of writing
kind of bsd and unix types of
applications the fact is this is the
abstraction layer that actually
represents the operating system and iOS
personality of the system and all of
these services are what the other
application environments use so for
things like cocoa in particular you have
pretty direct access to the BSD and
POSIX and system framework api's given
that when should you actually use these
things
well certainly if you're porting an
application from a POSIX environment a
bsd the linux or whatever that's a
pretty obvious case where you might
actually want to use the system
framework and those API is pretty
directly if a goal of your application
is actually to be able to have that kind
of portability obviously this is yet
another place where it makes sense for
you to be able to use these particular
api's when you're dealing in situations
when carbon and cocoa don't give you a
low enough level access to a particular
service this also makes sense this again
these particular application
environments are actually built on the
bsd api set and the system framework
they're there and available however you
should always try and use the highest
level of destruction you can for your
applications many times there's some
dependencies that exist in those higher
level abstractions for example if you're
using in carbon the dependency on the
the way the files and things like that
and the dependency ins and support for
things like resource forks are
completely supported by the carbon
environment access to resource Forks and
things like that
is way below the the abstraction layer
that something like the BSD api's will
support for you you'll actually have to
go in there and fiddle bits at that the
level so carbon actually helps you a lot
in those abstractions and so you should
really try and use the highest level of
abstraction you can but that isn't
always possible if you're porting a UNIX
application to Mac OS 10 one thing you
should realize is that built into the
system of course there are isn't built
in x windows support so if you're
porting some type of GUI app over you
really should not depend on it the good
news is there's actually a couple of
third-party solutions out there if
you're trying to port your app over I
believe
tenon has one they even want a design
award I believe and there's work going
on the X 386 community there's a
basically on Darwin itself you can run
Darwin without the rest of Mac os10 just
with an X Windows environment so it's
actually possible to actually port apps
like that over to the system obviously
an X Windows user interface is not
exactly the kind of user experience that
most of
our users are more likely to want to use
so this is probably just a stepping
stone approach that you would take to
porting an app to Mac OS 10 if you're
going to be wanting to really make it 10
friendly take advantage of aqua and the
other kinds of capabilities exist you
should probably be using cocoa to wrap
your your app so we effectively replace
the the GUI or the user interface with
cocoa Carbon can also work however I
found that cocoa is actually probably
the fastest and easiest way to get there
there's a number of little little hints
if you will about porting your app over
one thing for example is we basically
discourage the use of common variables
and such our implementation for dynamic
libraries is very very different we also
do not support the use of the the c c++
pre pre compiler at least is for the
purposes of porting are a pre compiler
for c++ is very different than than the
other environments and you should really
try and avoid its use again dynamic
libraries are very different under ten
so use of things like DL open is not
recommended that won't work you should
actually look at the deliberate ease
going to try and try and create
analogous solutions to pull the plug see
if plugins and other kinds of services
that exist those dynamic library
services are not the same on 10 one
thing to note is that new make in the
build environment is the default build
environment for BSD apps there is BSD
make on the system as well you need to
explicitly use it if that is how your at
what your app depends on also use of
auto comp which is a very common
portability solution that's available
for many BSD tools and applications
usually works and in fact a lot of the
pro various ports collections and things
like that or had been modified to run
under and build under Mac OS 10 already
however if you find that it doesn't we
actually include as part of the
developer tools and using Olympics
a set of config recipes if you will that
will usually allow your app to be able
to be ported over completely and one
other thing to note is that in terms of
how well the system is laid out and when
you're building your application
remember it is built on a bsd basically
uh if you know as a bsd system if you
compare this with how for example linux
files are laid out you're going to find
that the filesystem layout is a little
bit different between these two
environments and our environment
certainly reference is much more off of
the bsd environment and you should try
and if you're going to be modifying the
build you want to lean more towards a
bsd you know set of build variables and
settings in order to be able to get your
system to work all of these directories
that are mentioned here certainly exists
on the ten system but you probably
noticed they're invisible to the
end-user this is certainly something
that we're not trying to encourage
people to use in terms of the layout
some tools and and commands that you get
are dependent on some of these file
system layouts but from a perspective of
applications that you package up we've
actually would actually try and
encourage you to package them up as part
of a GUI app and in other places but
these standard install places exist I
kind of just show a little bit more
about how you might actually go about
porting an application to ten I'd like
to bring Eric Payton up
and New York you know one of the things
that I'm interested in seeing is you
know you're being able to take a nap or
I kind of off the net
yep and build it for ten how do you go
about doing that sure not a problem
so we see do we have the right yet we
did about a week and a half ago two
weeks ago Brett called me and said Eric
go to the ports collection and do
something cool and I said okay and I
went up to the ports collection which is
something I'm not intimately familiar
with but I've played around in there a
couple times and I had a mission I've
been playing around and I have a very
large collection of mp3 files and they
were spread over multiple different
directories multiple different discs and
I wanted to get them all on my nice big
server so I needed to find ones that
were duplicated all over the place and I
knew that I could do this with you know
a little bit of shell scripting but
that's not really the point here the
point here is to go get a tool to help
me do that bring it down make it maybe
put a GUI on it or something nice like
that so what I did is I went up into the
utilities directory up on the port's
collection up on FreeBSD org I believe
or something and I grabbed same file
what same file does is in multiple
different ways it looks at a collection
of files and determines which ones match
and one of the interesting things about
same file is that it does it from
standard in and vs. a lot of the other
ones we have to like enumerate all your
stuff on your command line and I thought
it'd be an interesting technical
challenge to bring this down right a
little make make sure that it builds and
do something interesting with it so I
downloaded it just you know I'm me web
or ie or whatever I used to came to
remember and I brought it down and
it's unpackage it now this is one of the
the well-behaved packages in the fact
that I can just whoops
once I get in the directory I can just
configure it and it works out of the box
like Brett said in user
live exec the config files are quite
often needed to to bring across a
package that hasn't been touched in in a
while something that hasn't been updated
recently with the more recent config
files but this one works out of the box
and I type make and if you notice I have
an executable that I built 25 seconds
ago or whatever it was and that's just
pulling down directly off of the ports
ago this is pulling directly off the
ports collection no work on my part no
messing with make files nothing just
everything works yeah a little bit we'll
talk a little bit about what the ports
collection is because you know certainly
one of the advantages of the bsd and
being part of the bsd community there's
they're actually thousands of
interesting little tools and utilities
that exist out there within this thing
called the ports collection yeah and the
interesting thing like I said was that
same file uses standard in to receive
its output and that's what you do in
this case I've got a little little
command line fine here that will find
all the files from here on down and pipe
it into same file and you notice here we
get if the font wasn't so big it might
actually look like lines but it's pretty
darn ugly this is not a Mac user yeah
this is not the user experience that
we're looking to provide for a Macintosh
application so like I expect better than
that yeah so we're gonna try to do
something a little bit better than this
you'll notice here before we move on
you'll notice the first column if you
look along this size here site here is
the size of the file that it found the
next column is the first file the next
column is the second file and there's
some extraneous stuff on the end which
doesn't really mean much unless you read
the readme and start playing around with
the different option
and that are available to it but that's
not really what I'm looking for here
I just want to find how big are my files
and which ones match up and are the
exact same size so let me get this right
this tool basically takes two big clumps
of file directories full of files and
points out which ones happen to be the
same ones regardless of what they're
called yep or anything
yep irregardless of filename and that
kind of good stuff and like I said this
could easily been done with shell
scripting but not nearly as interesting
so I have already let's go ahead and
hide that I've already created a project
but the first thing we want to do when
you're coming at something from a Coco's
perspective a lot of lot of times you
just want to make a UI first so I
created a project which provided the
main menu dot nib which if any of you
had been to any of the cocoa sessions
throughout the week you would have
probably seen that multiple times by now
and I've already dragged my files over
and I'll show you all the code in a few
minutes but let's just start off with
something simple here let's create a
little UI a lot of window make it nice
and big so that we can see these long
paths all over the place we will add a
table so we can see the output and you
got to love the blue lines and what we
really cared about was in that output we
had three columns that mattered we had
file size
the first file name and the second file
name and that provides us with some
interesting stuff so if we had ended up
with output that looks something like
this in a table view that we could sort
that we can mess around with that be a
little closer to a reasonable UI so
there we've got some nice big fat
columns so we can see all of our paths
and we can for example add a field that
will let us put in a path that we can
type in or how about even better a lot a
little button so that we can select a
directory to start from and I'll throw
another button up here that allows us to
search for duplicates that's
clean this up a little bit nothing
really major we're just playing around
I'll call this
half two files so the thing with with
certainly with programming and KOCO here
is basically what you're spending all
the time doing is laying out the UI yeah
this is the fun part
yeah spend a lot of time doing the fun
stuff laying it out make it all nice and
pretty and interface builder if you
haven't if you did if you missed the
interface builder tutorials and sessions
this week you missed a lot of really
good stuff it is one really cool tool so
here we've got a UI that I would
consider somewhat usable for us UNIX
people something that we can work off of
let's go ahead and stop right here and
start hooking stuff up and figure out
what's going on yeah we want the window
to be visible when we launch the
application I've already created a lot
of the code and we'll walk through that
together here in a second but let's
start off by creating our controller
object which I've already imported into
we have a same file controller object
I've already imported the code which
we'll look at in a minute let's go ahead
and hook up the portions of that object
that matter to us at this time once
again like I said if you missed the
interface builder talks I really
recommend that you spend some time
playing around with this tool it's
pretty cool so we've got a table for
output we have our three columns
a size column a column for our first
file and a column for our second file we
have a text field that is that contains
our path we have our our button that
begins and ends our tool we can go ahead
and stay here everything's hooked up
coming out of the controller we know
what all the output parts of the UI are
gonna be let's hook up what's going into
the controller the things that make
stuff happen so there's two major
portions here that matter and of course
the window is so big you can't see what
you're doing here hold on this is an
easy way to do it we want to tell the
system to start my tool we want to tell
the system let me select a directory
will save our little nib in our project
here and for now this is all we really
need to do so let's go ahead and go off
and open up our project that I
previously had created and let's walk
through what the code actually does to
actually get this to it to output
information to the GUI so at this point
this is all pretty standard cocoa stuff
yeah nothing really unusual nothing
unusual at all however it's not hooked
up to BSD there there's no tools
involved or anything like that first
thing we want to do let's go ahead and
add our well it's already here I'll show
you what it is I've already included the
the same file binary as a resource of my
project now this is the one you built
that was the command yet this is the one
that I built four minutes ago or
whatever it's a command-line tool
the reason that I'm putting in the
resources directory of my project is so
that I don't have to have separate
install instructions for my user to get
the same file UNIX binary installed on
their system in slash user user local
bin or anything like that if I include
it as part of my project they don't ever
have to worry about it it just becomes
cohesive whole it all works together
nothing else has to ship and they don't
have to install files in two locations
that they can't delete them from or
don't even know that it's happening in
the first place so basically if you're
gonna wrap something like a UNIX tool
unless it's something that already
exists in the system you can bundle put
it inside your application bundle and
make it you know just another resource
if you will of your application most
definitely and we really suggest that
you do that to avoid situations where
you're installing fragmented portions of
your package all over the hard disk it
it's not very Mac OS ish to do that it's
something that we're looking to to see
improvement from you now before I began
that our earlier we were talking about
my different classes and I had the same
file class and the same file class is is
the portion of my code that is the
controller object for what's going on in
my interface it consists of two major
parts it consists of two methods a
method for beginning my func my my
search and a method for finding finding
files for the user to do that so they
press that button and it fills in a path
so that stuff can happen let's start off
with the selector so the user runs the
application the first thing they're
gonna do is they're going to go off and
select a directory and so what I've done
here is I've added in a simple little
method here five lines of code creating
an open panel telling them that they can
can't choose files but they can only
choose directories
I don't want multiple selection at this
time it would be an easy enhancement to
add with some more UI later and then I
tell my my system to begin a sheet for a
directory you'll notice here it's modal
for the window and I've got a selector
that happens at the end so basically
this just pops up the sheet life isn't
possible sheet lets them do what they
want to do and everything works up above
the other
the only other method in this class at
all is the toggle tool method which will
start or stop your execution
if it's not executing go ahead and look
at the path that we had set up in the in
the UI the one that user just selected
the one the user selected or the one
that the user had typed in let's create
an array of our arguments the first
argument is the path to our same file
resource that's our binary that we had
included that's the straight UNIX binary
nothing special there then we add in
some arguments you'll notice here that I
have if verbose check state so if the
verbose checkbox is checked add an
object well I never added a verbose
checkbox and to show you a little bit
about how easy some of this stuff can be
what I'll do is I'll come back here and
I'll add a little checkbox on to my UI
verbose or you could name it something
much more concise than that if you
wanted to and we'll hook up the verbose
check there and what this would do if
you go back to the code that we're
looking at all it's going to do is it's
going to add an object into my array of
- V and we'll talk about why this array
looks the way that it looks in a minute
when we get to the process what is
really happen so basically like most
UNIX tools there's a half a bazillion
little options and stuff and it's very
easy in the UI to be able to add
checkboxes things like that most
definitely gonna hide that kind of stuff
away from having people lefting to build
command lines yeah it's a lot easier to
start once you have all this set up and
you'll see it's not very much code once
you have it set up it's very easy to add
command line switches can turn into GUI
switches very rapidly no very little
work whatsoever so you'll notice here
that I've at the beginning of this code
segment I've got a current process equal
process out luck init with controller
self arguments and what that is is for
every time that we run this we want to
have a process run something's going to
launch this UNIX tool get the output and
all that we feed it in with the
arguments at the end I just called them
Arg B but they you could name them
whatever you'd like down after that
you'll notice I have an append output
this is just a little log so that you
can see that it's begun begun running
and
in this block here you will notice that
what we do is we take the path that the
user had entered or selected use the NS
File Manager class which will a BSD
program would probably become a very
good friend of yours it's a it's a
general-purpose file manager class we
retrieve all of the paths at our the sub
paths from that path we even do some
nice stuff like we expand the Tilda in
path if you have BSD users they very
well might want to use tilde for their
home directory and not have to go
selecting all over the place with a with
a file browser because some people type
faster than they click usually the tilde
is something expanded by the shell not
yeah we have no shell performing any of
the actions here so there's there's no
possibility for expansion there we if I
can interrupt one thing that's worth
noting is there's a huge number of
facilities within the foundation portion
of cocoa that actually wrap a lot of and
do a lot of the the kind of the services
that would you expect to be able to talk
to background UNIX apps things like
expanding till these things like
breaking up command lines into specific
individual arguments yeah breaking up
command lines finding your home
directory finding the current user all
that kind of stuff are all portions of
foundation in this specific case is a is
a method on NS string but a lot of them
are are in different portions of the
foundation classes and they're very very
useful to somebody who's trying to
leverage BSD you'll notice here what we
have is to our process so we get all of
our paths we enumerate through our paths
and we pass our process on standard in
the string that we had just expanded and
then when we're finished with all once
we've spun through all of them we pass
it on we tell the process ok I'm done
writing go ahead and go off and do your
thing
the this closed writing is I guess you
could say an analogous to hitting ctrl D
at the end of messing around a cat I'm
done messing around go deuce do
something and that's all it is in our
same file class itself there's there's
nothing else to it really except for
handling of the output we
we've abstracted into the superclass so
we've got a class that controls them
pushing buttons but what happens
where would you know where where does
all this go on I don't see any work
going on here so you'll notice that I've
got another class process and a class
simple tool simple tool is the parent
class for the same file and the reason
that it's abstracted out was because the
simple tool class is an abstraction that
I've used in multiple different places
and it made it very quick and easy I
just literally dumped this class in
object-oriented programming let's use it
again and what it does is allow it it's
the thing that handles the output and
passes the output back to the UI now
there's a very common set of
abstractions when you're trying to wrap
a UNIX tool which is passing a set of
arguments and Kanyon you know
information into the tool and then
grabbing the output of the tool and
processing in some way that's
appropriate for the UI so you'll notice
here that the only thing that this thing
really does is have the process has
started ok let's create some strings to
stuff the data in and the process is
finished let's create some arrays to
stick the output in but we still don't
have the glue ok we can get the output
we can tell them what the input is but
what's in the middle and that's what my
process class is for so cocoa provides
in its foundation class a couple
fundamental tools that can be used by
bsd programmers NS pipe and s file
handle and s task and there's a bunch
more I expected you know all of you will
go home into your homework and start
playing around with them in the case
here if you remember earlier we we
created our array of output or our array
of paths and everything and put them or
our array of control and put it into an
arguments that we passed to init with
controller for the process class and
here you can see exactly what we do we
just retain those arguments and we
create a right to pipe the right pipe
you see there it's NS pipe I pertain
creates a pipe that we can use to pipe
to standard in if you look down into the
next major function
you'll see when they click on start when
they click on toggle tool and it begins
we gather all the arguments we tell it
to start the process we create an NS
task the one of the main purposes of NS
task is to wrap this kind of work for
you so that you don't have to do
interesting neat but boring things like
fork exec and sitting around and waiting
for output and as task does it all for
you and provides all these tools in an
object-oriented manner so that you can
access them you can set the standard
output you can set the standard error
you can set the standard input in our
case like I said earlier same file
presented a interesting case because it
needed standard in vs. most things was
just passed everything on the command
are a lot of tools that pass everything
on the command line so we've got a pipe
for four standard in and we've got the
same pipe for standard output and
standard error we tell it the launch
path you'll notice here the arguments is
object at index zero which is somewhat
hard-coded in this case but if you
remember back when I created the array
the first thing that I passed was the
path to the same file binary so my
launch path is the entire path to the
same file binary the little bitty UNIX
tool you're building up the command line
building up the command line right here
the next thing I do is set the arguments
and I want everything else except the
path to the to the UNIX command line so
I subarray with range and I start at one
and I just go to the to the end so this
one line right here will easily allow
you to just keep on adding on arguments
- B - D - for 1000 or whatever the
arguments need to be to that UNIX tool
you can add them on without having to
change your process class in any way
whatsoever you then need to register
with the Notification Center and if you
go in and look at NS file handle NS pipe
and NS tasks you'll notice there there
are some standardized themes throughout
all of them but one of them is the fact
that you can register with the
Notification Center to see when
something's done to see when a task
terminates and that kind of stuff here
you'll see that I'm registering for NS
file handle read completion notification
when the file handle has received some
output let me know
we're basically wanting to know when all
the output from the cool sure women when
the tool start spitting stuff at me I
want to know what it is the next thing I
want to do is I want to tell it to go
and that consists of two parts in this
in this situation we tell it to read in
background and notify that tells us your
job is to wait for background
notification and then tell me and then
we tell it much pretty simple stop
process is even simpler we tell it okay
remove my notification for reading and
let's terminate the task the only other
interesting thing in here is what
happens when I get data when I told it
that I wanted to register for
notification I gave it a selector to a
method notify me when I get data by
calling my get data method and you
notice here all it does is it takes all
this stuff and then it passes back to
the controller that I registered at the
beginning append output so we can get
the output this class does all the work
the only other I guess this is another
small but interesting thing you'll
notice here the insert string method
this is the method that goes to the
right pipe and and does standard in for
all intents and purposes to our little
UNIX tool and all it does is it writes
the data in utf-8 encoding and then the
pass is a /n newline on so that it knows
that all the writing is done and then
when we told it to closed writing at the
very last thing control D as I explained
earlier we let's close our file we're
done we're done piping stuff to standard
in go off and run and do stuff 99% of
what you just talked about is basically
standard for talking to any UNIX
application there's nothing unusual
about this particular tool that we're
running it's basically there's a hint a
couple of small methods that you use to
be able to pass information to the
background tool there's a small number
of methods to be able to read it in and
parse it and some basic stuff for
wrapping the management of that
particular task but the stuff that you
showed me so far as doesn't have
anything really at all to do with
your particular know this is very tool
agnostic if you if you know the we ship
some applications that are based on the
same style of concept network utility
for example uses multiple different UNIX
tools to do the same type of work and
this is this is the easiest fastest and
most productive way to do this kind of
thing so now we know we have the
controller that gets the information
from the user and tells that tells the
process to run the process runs and can
tell the controller the output the only
other interesting thing left is back in
here we have a tool so simple tool which
was our parent class knows how to put
output into a table view and for this
specific case it's a little hard coded
because it's a demo basically all it's
doing though is just taking the output
and formatting it up for the UI that's
it takes the output it creates a row or
you know an array of rows those rows
contain a raise of output the size of
the file the first file name of the
second file name and this is a table
view delegate which if you look back
here in the UI we had our table view and
our table view needs to be hooked up to
a delegate and a datasource
now what that does if you if you're
familiar with a bi programming a
datasource provides data to an object
that requests a table views browsers
those kind of I guess you could call
heavier weight cocoa objects quite a few
of them have data sources delegation is
a concept we won't go into here but it's
a it's a way of having an object perform
actions on the behalf of other objects
our table view needs to get the data
from something and so we've set it up as
is that it will get the data from our it
just knows to ask your it knows to ask
my class for the data when I'm ready to
have it draw it only matters there's
only two methods that that truthfully
matter and it's the table view wants to
know how many rows do I have so it can
start setting up its scroll bars know
how much amount of the amount of room it
needs to allocate and so on and then
what value do I put into this row for
this column and you notice here
if table column is the size column then
I want from my row array the very first
indexed object I want my size
you can use table column identifier to
get much better granularity than this in
in slightly less hackish terms but this
will do just as well
okay I'm in management I like to see the
end result show me end result so let's
build our project here
and he's a management you all notice
that built with no warnings no errors so
let's go ahead and select a directory
and this should all work let's select a
directory that we know has some
duplicates otherwise this would be very
boring you notice here I had to select
directory I filled in the path I could
have typed that path in as well but
gotta show that the Sheep works let's
see if this works
ooh there it goes and let's not a waited
long enough so you'll notice here what
it did is it went off and it grabbed all
that output is essentially the exact
same output with some typos errors it
looks like stuffed in there probably
parsing it's that's bug fixing this is
feature complete but not bugged finished
you'll notice here that it went off in
it noticed that I have a same file
binary inside my app which is what I
requested and if you look here in the
second column there's also a same file
binary in both the root of my app which
I copied there earlier on accident and a
same file binary in the same file
directory of what I downloaded you'll
notice that they're all exactly the same
and in this case they're all the exact
same name and everything but if we would
have renamed one of them it would have
shown it up anyway and done its magic if
we had turned on the verbose flag in
this case we don't have any place for
the verbose output to really go we could
have dumped it to standard out but if
the verbose output doesn't really belong
inside of a table view the next steps
for what you could do in here are things
like adding in flags for size the - s
flag I believes the same file then you
put in 10,000 that means I don't care
about anything underneath 10,000 bytes
so all it would have shown were these
first two rows that would have literally
been four more minutes worth of work but
my time is over
Thank You work I think the important key
here is there's as you see was a bit of
work around kind of setting up the
standard structure for being able to
talk to a background BSD application in
terms of being able to manage sending
data to it and getting it back but cocoa
does an enormous amount of the work here
those are being able value to parse the
arguments and frac you know tear them
apart and basically send them to you I
at this particular point it's UI polish
and that's really is the fun part but
the neat thing is being able to take you
know something like a BSD background
application and even just starting with
this as a starting point being able to
support just about anything you can
imagine that runs there and this is of a
particularly valuable and important
feature for Mac OS 10 of being able to
leverage these kinds of capabilities and
tools in the background of your
application and being able to provide
them forward to our end users in such a
way that doesn't require them to learn
you know something like Emacs or the
command line so we can move on back to
the slides thank you so it should be
kind of obvious you know why it is we
did BSD in here it is it provides an
enormous amount of power there's a lot
of leverage that's possible from being
able to have a system you know some
capability like this as part of Mac OS
10 there's a little bit of history
though that comes with with some of this
one you know certainly you know picking
bsd over maybe another solution is that
one this is pretty tried and true
technology it's been around for a long
time there's also a lot of history here
for that comes from our acquisition of
next part of it is the technology that
was used as part of next step which is
actually based on BS 3 bsd 4.3 and that
evolved along through open step until an
internal project it next called argon
which was the process that orion
modernized that particular component the
system they recently moved the bsd
subsystem to bsd for four so there's a
bit of history here in terms of how they
the evolution has occurred and as part
of our rhapsody ins of course part of as
mac OS 10 bsd that's part of the system
is based on basically some net bia
sources that are part of the BSD for for
derive source base and then most of our
user user land and library space is
either based on FreeBSD or it was in
something that we're working actively to
sync up with current and active versions
BSD also benefits a lot from much of the
other technology available and that it
is inherently for very scalable you may
or may not be aware that the servers
that are run Yahoo are all based on
FreeBSD he's a pretty robust and
powerful technology and that's certainly
something that we consider to be a
valuable you know set of features and
capabilities we want to have as part of
10 also BSD is something that's
incredibly well known there's a lot of
books and knowledge and inherent
community knowledge behind the
technology and that there's a very
important part of the decision process
for us and obviously the fact that it's
open source is another key aspect the
open source part of how we deal with the
operating system technology in 10 is a
very important part of how we do
business it's not just AG this is a
great way for us to get technology but
we're actively working with the
community at large to evolve it and the
nice thing about the BSD technology is
there's our great open source community
an active developer community already in
place that we can partner with and given
that I'd like to invite Jordan Hubbard
who's the founder and core team one of
the core team members of FreeBSD to talk
a little bit about FreeBSD
Swick yeah so as Brett said they
incorporated quite a bit of freebsd
technology into Darwin because several
years ago and the project was first
launched but I don't think that
collaboration certainly ends there and
there are a lot of interesting things
that we are doing at FreeBSD and have
done and I think that there's quite a
bit of room for collaboration in both
directions so I'll talk about it a
little bit from the FreeBSD perspective
so one of the nicest things I find from
a developer about FreeBSD is the source
tree organization and that may seem like
kind of a small thing but it's actually
of tremendous value for a lot of reasons
one thing it gives us is a common
taxonomy it gives us a place for
everything to go it gives its place for
new things to be incorporated into the
tree without having to argue for four
months about it first and it also means
that there's a one-to-one correspondence
between where binaries are for example
bin LS you know it's going to be an user
source bin LS so it's very easy to find
stuff and it also segregates all of the
code that's for example under the GPL or
as export restricted into concise areas
of the tree where you know exactly where
it is and you can firewall it off if
you're making a product that requires
the BSD license for example or you're
exporting it to Croatia and then there's
issues behind that the source tree also
handles it encodes all of the
bootstrapping issues so that if a binary
depends on a certain library it is smart
enough to go boil that library first
before building the binaries in question
and that removes a lot of the burden on
the developer of figuring out exactly
how things are tied together and that
that's it's very important we also have
a distinction between vendor supplied
software and stuff that we maintain
ourselves we use CVS very aggressively
and one of the things we do for example
is when a new version of GCC comes out
which is a vendor supplied bit of
software we import it on a vendor branch
and we have all of our own changes on
the project branch so we can keep the
two change sets distinct and so we know
exactly what the new people have changed
whoops my microphone fell off I'll just
hold it we know what the new people have
changed versus what we've had to change
and and this makes ongoing maintenance a
lot easier also we provide a series of
targets in the source tree like world
and kernel and update which remove a lot
of the the hair of knowing exactly what
order to build things in again so it
gives us a common reference point if we
have developers who are complaining that
they're seeing some strange and almost
behavior we can say well when did you
last build world and we know exactly
what that means we know that it's
they've gone and they've updated all of
their binaries and include files their
libraries and so forth from a common
reference point it also makes it easier
for newbie developers people who are
maybe not so familiar with the project
that may be very skilled at C or
whatever but they don't want to have to
learn the ins and outs of our build
system they just want to grab the source
Street type make world watch the whole
thing work and be done with it
so these are all things I hope that well
eventually in some way shape or form
migrate over to Darwin as I say we also
using CVS very aggressively have come up
with a number of interesting ways of
distributing the bits we have something
called CB sup which understands CVS
natively that means that when you run it
it pulls over just the deltas that have
been added to the repository since the
last time you ran it and that means that
it preserves your own local changes so
if you have a local branch in your own
CVS repository it's not just going to
come and splat a file on top of it it's
gonna interleave the deltas together and
that's that's very valuable it also uses
our sink and some other advanced
protocols so it's very fast and very
efficient and if you run it on a daily
basis it takes maybe 5-10 minutes to run
and you're completely synched up it also
understands how to check things out so
you can use CVS up to checkout a branch
of the repository so if you don't want
the repository bits but you want a
certain branch of FreeBSD you can ask
CVS up just to give you that and keep it
up to date
we also support some esoteric methods of
getting the bits like CTM which actually
bundles the patches together and check
sums them and sends them through mail so
you know some of our developers in
Estonia in places like that who don't
have good hard wired connections or who
have very infrequent connectivity can
sync up that way and then of course we
support the classic and on CB s methods
and we also have a CBS web interface so
that you can see very colorfully what's
changed at any particular point we also
support multiple branches of development
as I said earlier we have stable
branches which are sort of more tried
and tested branches that we aim at the
the end users and we have current which
is the bleeding spurting severed artery
edge of development which is guaranteed
to hurt you and so we aim the developers
more at that but we do supply both so
this means that we don't have to freeze
out developers from doing active and in
some cases experimental development that
development can always occur at whatever
pace it wants to but the the people the
yahoos of the world don't have to suffer
from that they get their changes back
ported from the current branch at a much
more slow rate of so slow pace and they
also get things tested you don't just
bring things immediately over into the
stable branches there's a there's a
methodology that requires a certain
amount of testing and integration on the
flip side it's also a real pain in the
butt to back port stuff so and CVS isn't
tremendously good at holding your hand
in that so it's that's an ongoing
project cost that we incur nor is it
very easy to synchronize things across
repositories so we have had a lot of
initiatives that have kind of fallen
flat to share code say between net bsd
and freebsd or previously and open BSD
because they have stuff in their
repository we have stuff in our
repository and it's just it's just a lot
of pain to manually bring those changes
back and forth so we're looking at ways
and perhaps automating that somehow
putting pointers in CVS for example
that's
whenever you make a change to this
particular subtree it gets bundled up
and sent over to a neighbor repository
and automatically checked in or
something like that there's a lot of
low-hanging fruit I think also in the
freebsd source tree that the darwin
community can benefit from we've added a
lot of creature comforts to our user
land you know just for example our ftp
client does file name completion so
whenever I'm on my OS 10 box I'm always
walking tab and kind of browning it but
it doesn't work so things like that
would certainly make a positive
difference we have a lot of really
interesting libraries that front end
things like fetching bit so Richard FTP
or HTTP that make writing clients a lot
easier and then obviously we have some
of the large-scale subsystems and
whatnot OpenSSH OpenSSL get updated I
think on a much more periodic basis we
have a lot of security work that's
ongoing we've added POSIX ACLs for
giving you much more granular access
control than simply the one big route
and obviously a lot of ongoing auditing
work as well and I would like to see
those changes getting into Darwin and on
a more frequent basis as I'm sure the
Darwin people would as well finally it's
also even though we do use a very
different driver model Darwin using i/o
kit and that's using new bus I think
that obviously having working drivers to
look at is a tremendous benefit to
Darwin developers and I hope that they
will be we'll continue to use them so
getting away from the bundled apps we
also have the ports collection which
you've heard referenced a couple times
already I started it in August 20th 1994
I just wanted to kind of prove a concept
which was that you could create an
expert system as it were for porting
software that is to say I found whenever
I went into a new box the first things I
do is I bring over Emacs I bring over
bash I'd bring over a couple of tools I
was familiar with and that involved of
course remembering where they were where
the reference repositories on the net
were FTP unpacking them configuring them
building them installing them in the
whole nine yards and it occurred to me
that you know there was kind of a very
common process running across all these
different types
where and maybe I could encode the
smarts for doing that in addition to any
patches that I might need to make into
some sort of taxonomy and this became
the port's collection I think by the end
of the year it was 200 ports or so and
today it's over 50-100 ports in 52
different categories there are languages
localized versions of software German
Vietnamese you name it it's just a huge
huge collection of stuff and it grows at
a rate of about 50 percent a year so far
and there's there's really no end in
sight unfortunately there have been some
Forks of the ports collection the net
bsd and the open BSD folks have taken
them made some slight tweaks and the
open packages effort was launched by
daemon News in an effort to kind of
bring all that back together again and
create one common standard for the
port's collection and so that they've
been doing very good work there and I
believe they've gotten Darwin to sign on
as well and so Darwin will be
substantially leveraging a lot of that
effort as I said what the port's
collection does is it automates the
fetching the configuring the building
installation and all of the dependency
checking so if you build some little
gnome client for example it goes off and
installs reams and reams of stuff goes
off and gets libraries gets a support
infrastructure a tremendous amount of
stuff basically drags all of norming
with it and you don't have to know about
all of that and it's a tremendous time
saver it also is the way that we build
all of our packages because you've got
the dependency information already
encoded in the port's collection it's
very easy to pass that onto the package
system which was actually written after
after the port's collection was done and
it gives us a great way of automating
the package building we have a cluster
of 16 or so machines which do nothing
but 24 hours a day build all 50 100
packages and put them off into an FTP
site and you can you can access this
very easily just by doing package add -
our name of package and it will go off
and figure out what version of the
operating system you're running
what the closest FTP site is and suck it
down along with all of the dependencies
so if you don't want to build the stuff
from ports and go through all the
compilation time you don't have to do
that we also use the packages to do more
than just store the results of Port
building they're also a great way of
encapsulating other binaries for example
the Linux Netscape ports and whatnot are
really just encapsulated binaries that
go off and make sure that all the
dependencies and stuff have been
properly resolved so they're useful for
a wide range of things so like I say
it's really great that it saves a lot of
time and makes it really easy to go
build really complicated pieces of
software without having to know anything
about the dependencies and or where the
tar balls are stored or what particular
weird configuration arguments you need
to use it's all and pretty much
hands-off what sucks about it is all of
this is encoded in Berkeley make and if
I had it to do over again I probably
would have put all the meta information
in XML or something and written a tool
which just extracted the information and
built the make files on the fly or
something so I am actively looking now
at some way of doing a imports next
generation effort or something which
which makes it a lot easier to build
documentation trees web browser Bowl
pages and whatnot which describe the
ports collection and that's something I
hope maybe we can do hand in hand with
Darwin
so I think our community is at least as
important as our bits obviously we've
been around for nine years and we
wouldn't have been around this long if
we hadn't had some ways of keeping the
whole thing coherent
which is now a democratically elected
body that is chosen by the majority of
committers and committers are people who
have right access to the CVS repository
so if you're a committer you can stand
for election and every two years we
choose a majority it's a pretty good
system and I think we should try it in
this country sometime anyway we have 267
CVS committers now who are segregated in
three different categories the docks
people who just work on docks people who
work on the bundled sources and the
people who work on the port's collection
so you don't need to have be a
cross-disciplinary person you can choose
an area to specialize on and committers
are approved by core so we're not quite
as it's not quite as difficult as it is
to become a Darwin developer for example
but you do need to have the unanimous
approval of Corps before you make it in
so there's some level of quality control
we also make allowances for sort of
collective versus individual ownership
in in the large picture FreeBSD as a
project owns the sources and nobody can
really put an exclusive lock but we do
have kind of a non exclusive lock model
where somebody says hey I'm really
maintaining this everybody should should
lockstep their changes through me
because I understand it better than
anybody else and so we have maintainer
bits that allow for that and this works
very well actually because it lets
people feel a certain degree of
ownership over it but without destroying
sort of the collective ownership of the
sources which which keeps the project
together and I think it's really
important to to get developers hearts
and minds if you want to keep them
interested over the long term and what I
mean by that is you can't just get a
pile of bits thrown over the wall
periodically from some developer who
doesn't buy off on your vision or your
overall strategy because that pile of
bits will just hit the ground with a
dull thud and start to smell
immediately we tried that with with bsd
OS and some other groups where we're
code was sermon over the wall but we
didn't get the developers that came
along with those bits and that was a
critical mistake in all cases and in
such cases those projects essentially
died off so if I could say something to
the Darwin community would be it's not
just about the bits it's about
communicating your vision and really
getting people to buy into it and that's
what gives you longevity so our identity
as it were is also determined largely by
the users and this was kind of a shock
to us we started off as a bunch of
hobbyists with a computing problem and
we did it really for our own own
edification and and ego gratification
and whatnot but what we found is that we
have pretty much been driven over the
last five or six years by what the users
want because they all very loudly for it
and we have some pride in our work and
so we have really become extremely user
driven the yahoos of the world pretty
much tell us what to do they ask nicely
because they've learned their lesson but
they do essentially drive our direction
and so our vision is essentially nothing
more than listen to what the users ask
for and try and fulfill that as best
possible and still try to have fun
obviously and people will still work on
things that interest them the most but
if I had to point to the overall
direction it would be listen to the
users and I think that's that's what's
going to happen with Darwin as well the
needs of OS 10 will dictate Darwin's
direction if they follow a parallel line
of evolution so where I think that
FreeBSD project can work with Apple and
an ongoing basis is one I think that
Apple is helping us to shatter the
desktop myth which is that BSD or
FreeBSD are only good for servers
because they run Yahoo's and hot males
and companies like that that it's no
good as a desktop OS and we've certainly
known that that's not true but Apple is
helping to really drive the point home
with a very large hammer and we
appreciate that it's a great foundation
for a desktop operating system
and I think that having the same OS run
on your server and your desktop also
means that interoperability is more or
less assured you're gonna have the right
tools for doing network communications
between the two it's going to be much
easier to administer a heterogeneous
collection of servers and desktops
and I really think that that there's a
strong case to be made for that for one
operating system being both and also
paradoxically I think Darwin has more
freedom to innovate now than we do we
have been around for nine years we have
a very stodgy and and somewhat
conservative user base and as I said
they tend to drive our direction so we
can't make any sudden u-turns or or
swerve in in in violent directions
without pissing a lot of people off
whereas Darwin is still comparatively
young and they're well firewalled in
some respects from OS 10 by this nice
GUI desktop and I think that Darwin has
already done quite a bit of interesting
stuff with IO kit and and even the stuff
pulled across your Mach that addresses
some of the old problems in very new
ways and that's something that I think
we can learn from Darwin can learn a lot
from similar methodologies and they can
learn a lot from our technologies but I
think we can learn the most from
Darwin's innovation and I look forward
to working with them in the future thank
you
Thank You Jordan so kind of in closing
here again you really need to realize
that BSD is an amazingly powerful part
of Mac OS 10 we've done a really good
job of hiding it but from you as a
developer it's there it's something you
can take advantage of and really should
however you should be careful about
exposing the you end-user to the unit
user user experience it is a pretty
different world underneath the covers
there this is a very powerful tool for
you to use as a developer it's a
powerful tool to help leverage new
technology into Mac OS 10 but it's up to
you as the developer is to be very
cognizant of keeping it Macintosh in
terms of the ease of use and the kinds
of things that you would expect on a Mac
and there's a very interesting
juxtaposition there are goals it's also
important for you to realize that many
of the BSD parts of the system are
actually optional in terms of how
they're installed so if you're writing
an application on Mac OS 10 and you're
depending on bits and pieces of BSD make
sure that you include the pieces that
you need to and that you know what's
actually installed kind of in the base
system install the BSD package that
exists and install installer may
actually you know may not be installed
by the user and in some environments may
they may decide not to so be very very
careful about making assumptions about
what pieces are actually in the base
install of the system and there are
things you can do like packaging your
tools as part of your application to
help protect you from that and we're
working on additional things for you
know long term for being able to do
things like package management and stuff
like that to help out but it's something
you should be very conscious of make
sure you leverage Darwin I think this is
an important part of Mac OS 10 and I
mean Darwin from the open-source
perspective this is a pretty new
paradigm for for the Apple community to
use and we something that we consider to
be a real advantage that Mac os10 brings
to the table take advantage of it also
leverage free of the freebsd community
there were very much part of our
extended community
you know Jordan you know and and his
team really is you know brings a lot of
experience and stuff to this aspect of
the system and we're really happy to be
partnering with them and being part of
that community and would it very much
encourage you to leverage some of the
knowledge and technology and that exists
there become part of the community we
have a vast email lists and other
services and capabilities that exist in
under the open-source website and as
part of them that developer mailing
lists and stuff that you can really gain
an awful lot by being part of the Darwin
community and barded the bsd community
so you know help join and be part of it
to get more information on this we
certainly have a lot of information
around the open-source aspects of the
system that are on our open-source
apple.com website there's also if you're
interested in learning a lot about unix
and and the bsd pieces a handful of
books out there that are pretty good one
of you know the things that i would
recommend if you're understand learning
about the bsd internals is getting the
design implementation of the bsd
operating system by kurt mcusic he's
certainly one of the real the key Keefe
if you will defending fathers of bsd and
there's a lot that can be learned
there's also a number of our riley books
on all the various technologies that
exist in the covers as well as a freebsd
in it and SBA's net bsd organizations
again they're part of the extended
community if you also understood and
learning more about the ports collection
just this week I know one of the vendors
actually has available at the Mac tech
booth a four CD set of ports that have
already been imported to Darwin and Mac
OS 10 so there's already a lot of
community activity there encourage you
to go grab a copy of it
and lastly later this afternoon if
you're still hanging around we have a
feedback forum at five o'clock we'd
certainly like to see you be part of
you